The word for there is or there are, there is or there are, in most languages this is a separate verb
But in English we are expressing it with the combination of there and is or are.
In Spanish to say there is or there are, we have I
I, H A Y.
And I is actually from Aber.
I.
And for once we have a situation where it's changing in English and it's not changing in Spanish.
I means there is or there are.
It's not changing.
The word for somebody is a Algian.
Algian.
Good.
How would you say there is somebody here that wants to speak with you and let's speak formally
There is somebody here that wants to speak with you.
So the first bit is there is somebody here
I, Alkin, Aki.
Good.
That wants to speak with you, speak informally
Hay alguien aquí que quiere hablar con usted.
There is somebody here that wants to speak with you.
Now, if you say, is there somebody here that speaks Spanish?
And you specify with your subjectivity this thing that we don't know if it exists or not, this somebody that speaks Spanish.
and you do that with this que structure.
Is there somebody here that speaks Spanish?
Then here you will use the mood tense.
This
Subjective tense.
So how would you say that?
Is there somebody here that speaks Spanish?
Very good.
But if somebody replies to you, there are two people that speak Spanish here.
There are two people here that speak Spanish.
You think you will use the moot tense?
No.
They are just saying what there is.
So there are two people, which in Spanish is there are two persons.
So there are two people here.
Hay dos personas aquí that speak Spanish.
Very good.
Hay dos personas aquí que hablan español.
The past of I is abia, which shows us actually that I comes from a bear.
It's a very weird historic version of Aber.
But Abia we see more clearly that it comes from Aber.
Now Abiyah doesn't change either.
Also you will have to resist the temptation to say abian.
when you want to say there were instead of there was.
No, it's always abia.
Doesn't change.
I doesn't change for there is or there are and abia doesn't change for there
was or there were.
So how would you say there were two people that spoke Spanish?
Now this is an interesting sentence because in English we will use the point
in the past.
There were two people that spoke Spanish.
But what do you think we will use in Spanish?
The point or the line?
The line.
Why?
Because I've heard Spaniards speaking in English saying it that way.
I guess.
So you really you heard the negative uh language transfer?
Oh that's great.
So
It makes sense for it to be the line in the bus because what we're referring to here is the fact they were Spanish speakers and they weren't Spanish speakers just for that moment, were they?
So if we look at it and we think about which one fits better, we will choose the line.
So again it's a great example that we don't want to take a direct translation from English from spoke.
We want to just look at the context and decide if it makes sense to use the line or the point.
So give me this sentence.
There were two people here that spoke Spanish.
Había dos personas aquí que hablaban español.
Good.
If we were to use the point here, que hablaron español, we wouldn't be talking about the fact that they are Spanish speakers, but rather that they spoke Spanish at that time, whatever time we're referring to.
We said that I there is or there are or abia there was or there were comes from a bair in fact
So when we say something like there has to be something, and with this be we mean exist, there has to exist something.
This P is actually coming from there is there are, not from to be.
It's coming from this invisible verb that we do not have in English, which we make up for by using there is there are
So when we say something like there has to be something that you can eat.
There must be something that you can do.
This B is exist.
There must exist something, in which case it's a bear
It's not Sir and it's not a star.
And if you try to think which one it is, there are a star you will be a long time trying to work out which one it is
So how would you say this sentence?
There has to be something that you can do.
Let's speak informally.
You can use has to or must.
It doesn't make a lot of difference here.
Tiene gie.
But it's two form, huh?
So I and Dabia come from
A ver tiene que haber something that you can do
Algo que puedas hacer.
Yes, puedas.
Very good.
Tiene que haber algo que puedas hacer.
Because here, like before, with the example of
Is there somebody that speaks Spanish?
We are speaking about the existence of something when we don't know whether it exists or not, with this structure of I and K.
So we're seeing that the mood tense has structural limitations.
It can occur only in certain places structurally and at the same time only to give certain meanings or feelings.
Now these meanings or feelings and the fact that Spanish is concerned with us expressing them and perceiving them through the language shows the value system of Spanish or part of the value system of Spanish.
different languages have different value systems.
What what the language requires you to express through it and then the other things that the language might ignore might be considered its value system.
And languages like cultures and individuals have things they value, things they pay attention to, and things they don't.
Which is what makes something like the mood tense
So incredibly interesting to analyze and observe and use.
So again, not something we want to be obsessed about getting correct.
It really is something that we want
Idiolect, which is the individual dialect of each person.
So we want to look out for it
Listen actively, analyze and enjoy the journey of understanding it and also using it and the different possibilities of expression that that gives us.
It will be a very fascinating insight into the value system of this particular language